Reworked our content around Enterprise alerts (#224)
astronomer/docs: enterprise/v0.23/07_monitor/03_platform-alerts.md

---

## Overview

You can subscribe to two different types of alerts on Astronomer: Deployment alerts and platform alerts. Platform alerts can be used to monitor the health of platform components such as ElasticSearch and DockerRegistry, while Deployment alerts can be used to monitor the health and performance of individual Deployments.

Both Deployment and platform alerts are:
- Defined in Helm using [PromQL query language](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/).
- Fire via [Prometheus Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/alertmanager).

Astronomer offers built-in Deployment and platform alerts, as well as the ability to create custom alerts. This guide provides all of the information you need to configure Prometheus Alertmanager, subscribe to existing alerts, and create custom alerts.

Additionally, Airflow offers its own alerting service for individual DAGs and tasks. For more information on configuring this feature, read [Airflow Alerts](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/enterprise/v0.23/customize-airflow/airflow-alerts).

## Access the Prometheus and Alertmanager UIs

> You can access the Prometheus & Alertmanager UIs that are deployed in the Astronomer platform using Kubectl to port forward. For example, the following commands can be used to access these UIs in the `astronomer` namespace.

Reviewer: In the AWS install doc it also looks like there's another set of prometheus "blackbox-exporter" pods? Maybe clarify that these pods are NOT the ones you need to specify in the commands above?

`astronomer-prometheus-blackbox-exporter-65f6c5f456-865h2`

(At least I think that's the case, but worth double checking)

> You can access the Prometheus & Alertmanager UIs that are deployed in the Astronomer platform using Kubectl to port forward. For example, the following commands can be used to access these UIs in the `astronomer` namespace.

Author: You know, I was hoping the purpose of this section would become more clear as I continued to work in the doc, but now I'm not really sure why it's here at all. For one, how does Grafana actually manage the alert side of things? Isn't it just a visual representation of Prometheus data that has no effect on whether the alert actually fires?

In addition, the rest of this setup uses neither Prometheus nor Alertmanager UI. In that case, would it just be better to axe this and bring the contextual information about Prometheus up to Overview? That's what I went for in this latest edit, let me know what you think.

> You can access the Prometheus & Alertmanager UIs that are deployed in the Astronomer platform using Kubectl to port forward. For example, the following commands can be used to access these UIs in the `astronomer` namespace.

Author: If the Alertmanager UI is the only place you can see the alerts after adding them via `config.yaml` we could have a "Validate metrics were added" step with this info.

---
title: "Alerting in Astronomer Enterprise"

> navTitle: "Enterprise Alerts"

Reviewer: Platform Alers too much?

Author: Too little I'd say, since we also mention Deployment alerts here.

Reviewer: Maybe "Astronomer Alerts"? Agreed on not "Platform Alerts" 🤷‍♀️

description: "Route common Airflow Deployment and platform alerts to your preferred channel via Prometheus Alertmanager."
---

## Overview

> You can use two built-in alerting solutions for monitoring the health of your Astronomer platform:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use two built-in alerting solutions for monitoring the health of your Astronomer installation:
```

* `annotations.summary`: The text for the alert that's sent via Alertmanager.
* `annotations.description`: A human-readable description of what the alert does.

By default, your Astronomer platform checks for all alerts defined in [the Prometheus configmap](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/prometheus/templates/prometheus-alerts-configmap.yaml).

## Configure Alertmanager

Alertmanager is the Astronomer platform component that manages alerts, including silencing, inhibiting, aggregating, and sending out notifications via methods such as email, on-call notification systems, and chat platforms.

You can configure [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/) to send alerts to email, HipChat, PagerDuty, Pushover, Slack, OpsGenie, and more by defining alert receivers in the [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml) and pushing them to the [Alertmanager ConfigMap](#https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/release-0.23/charts/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager-configmap.yaml).

### Create alert receivers

> Alertmanager users [receivers](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/#receiver) to integrate with different messaging platforms. To begin sending notifications for alerts, you first need to define `receivers` in YAML using the [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alertmanager uses [receivers](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/#receiver) to integrate with different messaging platforms. To begin sending notifications for alerts, you first need to define `receivers` in YAML using the [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml).
```

Typo?

Author: Nice catch

This Helm chart contains groups for each possible alert type based on `labels.tier` and `labels.severity`. Each receiver must be defined within one or multiple alert types.

For example, adding the following receiver to `receivers.platformCritical` would cause platform alerts with a `critical` severity to appear in a specified Slack channel:

```yaml
alertmanager:
  receivers:
    # Configs for platform alerts
    platform: {}

    platformCritical: {
      - name: platform-critical-receiver
        slack_configs:
        - api_url: https://hooks.slack.com/services/T02J89GPR/BDBSG6L1W/4Vm7zo542XYgvv3
          channel: '#astronomer_platform_alerts'
          text: |-
            {{ range .Alerts }}{{ .Annotations.description }}
            {{ end }}
          title: '{{ .CommonAnnotations.summary }}'
    }
```

By default, the Alertmanager Helm Chart contains groups for platform, critical platform, and Deployment alerts. To configure a receiver for another type of alert, such as Deployment alerts with `labels.severity: high`, add that receiver to the `customRoutes` list with the appropriate `match_re` values. For example:

```yaml

> customRoutes: {}

Reviewer 2: This should look like:
```
alertmanager:
  customRoutes:
  ...
```

  - name: deployment-high-receiver
    match_re:
      tier: airflow
      severity: high
    email-configs: # etc.
```

> For more information on building and configuring receivers, read the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on building and configuring receivers, refer to [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/).
```

> ### Push alert receivers to your platform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Push alert receivers to your installation
```

Assuming we're standardizing on this?  👀

Reviewer: Or just "To Astronomer", which is the language we use here: https://www.astronomer.io/docs/enterprise/v0.23/manage-astronomer/apply-platform-config

> To add a new receiver to your Astronomer platform, add your receiver configuration to your `config.yaml` file and push the changes to your installation as described in [Apply a Config Change](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/enterprise/stable/manage-astronomer/apply-platform-config). The receivers you add must be specified in the same order and format as they appear in the Alertmanager Helm chart. Once you push the alerts to your platform, they are automatically added to the [Alertmanager ConfigMap](#https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/release-0.23/charts/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager-configmap.yaml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add a new receiver to Astronomer, add your receiver configuration to your `config.yaml` file and push the changes to your installation as described in [Apply a Config Change](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/enterprise/stable/manage-astronomer/apply-platform-config). The receivers you add must be specified in the same order and format as they appear in the Alertmanager Helm chart. Once you push the alerts, they are automatically added to the [Alertmanager ConfigMap](#https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/release-0.23/charts/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager-configmap.yaml).
```

> ## Create Custom Alerts

Reviewer: Ah to some extent wasn't sure that the section above was about subscribing to built-in alerts versus creating new ones (given the receiver section etc.) This may well be a "You didn't read this closely enough", but maybe there's room to be more explicit?

Author: I changed "Configure Alertmanager" to "Subscribe to Built-In Alerts", because when people are reading this they're not thinking "How do I configure Alertmanager?" They're thinking "How do I subscribe to alerts?"

In addition to subscribing to Astronomer's built-in alerts, you can also create custom alerts and push them to Astronomer.

Platform and Deployment alerts are defined in YAML via the Prometheus Helm chart. For example, the following alert will fire if more than 2 Airflow Schedulers across the platform are not heartbeating for more than 5 minutes:

> ```yaml
> additionalAlerts:
>   # Additional rules for the 'platform' alert group
>   # Provide as a block string in yaml list form
>   platform:
>     - alert: ExamplePlatformAlert
>       # If greater than 10% task failure
>       expr: count(rate(airflow_scheduler_heartbeat{}[1m]) <= 0) > 2
>       for: 5m
>       labels:
>         tier: platform
>         severity: critical  
>       annotations:
>         summary: {{ printf "%q" "{{value}} airflow schedulers are not heartbeating." }}
>         description: If more than 2 Airflow Schedulers are not heartbeating for more than 5 minutes, this alert fires.
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```yaml
prometheus:
  additionalAlerts:
    # Additional rules for the 'platform' alert group
    # Provide as a block string in yaml list form
    platform:
      - alert: ExamplePlatformAlert
        # If greater than 10% task failure
        expr: count(rate(airflow_scheduler_heartbeat{}[1m]) <= 0) > 2
        for: 5m
        labels:
          tier: platform
          severity: critical  
        annotations:
          summary: {{ printf "%q" "{{value}} airflow schedulers are not heartbeating." }}
          description: If more than 2 Airflow Schedulers are not heartbeating for more than 5 minutes, this alert fires.
```
```

To push custom alerts to your platform, add them to the `AdditionalAlerts` section of your `config.yaml` file and push the file via Helm as described in [Apply a Config Change](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/enterprise/stable/manage-astronomer/apply-platform-config).

Once you've pushed the alert to your platform, make sure that you've configured Alertmanager to send the alert to an appropriate receiver based on either its `tier` or `severity`. For more information, read [Configure AlertManager](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/enterprise/v0.23/monitor/platform-alerts#configure-alertmanager).

## Reference: Common Built-in Alerts

> Refer to the following tables for some of the most common alerts that you might receive from your Astronomer platform.

Reviewer: Following tables seems a little off for some reason since the tables are not immediately below - maybe just, `Refer to the breakdown below for some of the most common...`?

Author: Tried rewording this a bit.

---
title: "Alerting in Astronomer Enterprise"
navTitle: "Enterprise Alerts"
description: "Route common Airflow Deployment and platform alerts to your preferred channel via Prometheus Alertmanager."
---

## Overview

You can use two built-in alerting solutions for monitoring the health of your Astronomer platform:

> - Deployment-level alerts notify you when the health of an Airflow Deployment is low or if any of Airflow's underlying components are underperforming, including the Airflow Scheduler.
> - Platform-level alerts notify you when a component of your Astronomer installation is unhealthy, such as Elasticsearch, Astronomer's Houston API, or your Docker Registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deployment-level alerts that notify you when the health of an Airflow Deployment is low or if any of Airflow's underlying components are underperforming, including the Airflow Scheduler.
- Platform-level alerts that notify you when a component of your Astronomer installation is unhealthy, such as Elasticsearch, Astronomer's Houston API, or your Docker Registry.
```

> These alerts fire based on metrics collected from the KubeAPI by Prometheus. If the conditions of an alert are met, [Prometheus Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/alertmanager) handles the process of sending the alert to the appropriate communication channel.

Reviewer 3: These aren't only from the Kubernetes API, the metrics are collected from a variety of services in the cluster. Maybe drop where they are collected from, or broaden the description

You can configure [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/) to send Astronomer's built-in alerts to email, HipChat, PagerDuty, Pushover, Slack, OpsGenie, and more by defining alert receivers in the [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml) and pushing them to the [Alertmanager ConfigMap](#https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/release-0.23/charts/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager-configmap.yaml).

### Create alert receivers

Alertmanager uses [receivers](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/#receiver) to integrate with different messaging platforms. To begin sending notifications for alerts, you first need to define `receivers` in YAML using the [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml).

This Helm chart contains groups for each possible alert type based on `labels.tier` and `labels.severity`. Each receiver must be defined within at least one alert type in order to reveive notifications.

> For example, adding the following receiver to `receivers.platformCritical` would cause platform alerts with a `critical` severity to appear in a the `#astronomer_platform_alerts` Slack channel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, adding the following receiver to `receivers.platformCritical` would cause platform alerts with `critical` severity to appear in the `#astronomer_platform_alerts` Slack channel:
```

kubectl port-forward svc/cantankerous-gecko-alertmanager -n astronomer 9093:9093
```

After running these commands, a user in this namespace could go to `localhost:9090` or `localhost:9093` in their browser to access the UIs.

## Configure Alertmanager

Alertmanager is the Astronomer platform component that manages alerts, including silencing, inhibiting, aggregating and sending out notifications via methods such as email, on-call notification systems, and chat platforms.

> You can configure [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/) to send alerts to email, HipChat, PagerDuty, Pushover, Slack, OpsGenie, and more by editing the [Alertmanager ConfigMap](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager-configmap.yaml).

Author: Very nice catch!!

### Configure an alert receiver

You can subscribe to platform alerts by editing the [Alertmanager ConfigMap](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager-configmap.yaml) via your `config.yaml` file.

The [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml) contains a section where you can specify different alert receivers. For example, the following configuration would cause platform alerts with a `critical` severity to appear in a specified Slack channel:

```yaml
receivers:
  # Configs for platform alerts

>   platform: {}

Reviewer 2: Should look like this if being referenced through top-level `config.yaml`:
```
alertmanager:
  receivers:
    platform: {}
    ...
```

kubectl port-forward svc/cantankerous-gecko-alertmanager -n astronomer 9093:9093
```

> After running these commands, a user in this namespace could go to `localhost:9090` or `localhost:9093` in their browser to access the UIs.

Reviewer: Would be great to get screenshots here

## Configure Alertmanager

Alertmanager is the Astronomer platform component that manages alerts, including silencing, inhibiting, aggregating and sending out notifications via methods such as email, on-call notification systems, and chat platforms.

> You can configure [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/) to send alerts to email, HipChat, PagerDuty, Pushover, Slack, OpsGenie, and more by editing the [Alertmanager ConfigMap](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/release-0.23/charts/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager-configmap.yaml).

Reviewer: Maybe add an extra but short descriptor to Alertmanager ConfigMap? Is it a file that was created by default? Where does it live? What else can it be used for?

Author: Tried doing this in my latest push!

### Configure an alert receiver

> You can subscribe to platform alerts by editing the [Alertmanager ConfigMap](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/release-0.23/charts/alertmanager/templates/alertmanager-configmap.yaml) via your `config.yaml` file.

Reviewer: Not sure what the solve is, but this sentence feels a little repetitive to the two above

Author: I made a slightly major edit on this by removing any mention of the ConfigMap. If admins never touch this file themselves (they only configure the Helm chart), then I think it's OK to abstract it away. Instead, I used this space to be more specific about what receivers are and why they're necessary for alerting.

> The [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml) contains a section where you can specify different alert receivers. For example, the following configuration would cause platform alerts with a `critical` severity to appear in a specified Slack channel:

Reviewer: Define alert receiver?

Author: See comment above

> The [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml) contains a section where you can specify different alert receivers. For example, the following configuration would cause platform alerts with a `critical` severity to appear in a specified Slack channel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Alertmanager Helm chart](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml) contains a section where you can specify different alert receivers.

For example, the following configuration would trigger alerts with `critical` severity to appear in a specified Slack channel:
```

```yaml
alertmanager:
  receivers:
    # Configs for platform alerts
    platform: {}

    platformCritical: {
      - name: platform-critical-receiver
        slack_configs:
        - api_url: https://hooks.slack.com/services/T02J89GPR/BDBSG6L1W/4Vm7zo542XYgvv3
          channel: '#astronomer_platform_alerts'
          text: |-
            {{ range .Alerts }}{{ .Annotations.description }}
            {{ end }}
          title: '{{ .CommonAnnotations.summary }}'
    }
```

> To add a new receiver to Astronomer Enterprise, add the receiver object to your `config.yaml` file and push the changes to your platform as described in [Apply a Config Change](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/enterprise/stable/manage-astronomer/apply-platform-config). The receivers you add must be in the same order and format as they appear in the Alertmanager Helm chart. For more information on building and configuring receivers, read the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/).

Reviewer: To your installation?

Author: Oof, I'm not quite ready to make a call on this yet. Gonna keep it as `platform` now to be consistent with this guide, as well as the Apply a Config Change guide.

    - alert: ExamplePlatformAlert
      # If greater than 10% task failure
      expr: count(rate(airflow_scheduler_heartbeat{}[1m]) <= 0) > 2
      for: 5m
      labels:
        tier: platform
        severity: critical  
      annotations:
        summary: {{ printf "%q" "{{value}} airflow schedulers are not heartbeating." }}
        description: If more than 2 Airflow Schedulers are not heartbeating for more than 5 minutes, this alert fires.
```

Example:
### Push a custom alert to your platform

```
alertmanager:
  receivers:
    platform:
      slack_configs:
      - api_url: https://hooks.slack.com/services/T02J89GPR/BDBSG6L1W/4Vm7zo542XYgvv3
        channel: '#astronomer_platform_alerts'
        text: |-
          {{ range .Alerts }}{{ .Annotations.description }}
          {{ end }}
        title: '{{ .CommonAnnotations.summary }}'
```
Because platform alerts are built in .yaml, you can push them to your platform in the same way you push other platform configuration changes: Add the alert to your `config.yaml` file and push the file via Helm as described in [Apply a Config Change](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/enterprise/stable/manage-astronomer/apply-platform-config).

> You can read more about configuration options [here](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/).

Reviewer 2: Do we want to include the `customRoutes` option? https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/ceda02d7fd39b72c3544606a0faf429d3408c03c/charts/alertmanager/values.yaml#L51. I'm not sure.

Author: How popular is this option, and what can it do that the other receiver objects can't? If there's a lot of considerations or it's as "custom" as the name implies, I'm hesitant to put that info in a general guide like this.

Reviewer 2: Saw you added this, thanks

| `ElasticsearchDiskUsage` | Elasticsearch high disk usage, has less than 10% disk space available. |
| `IngressCertificateExpiration` | TLS Certificate expiring soon, expiring in less than a week. |

> The following table contains popular alerts that you might want to subscribe to:

Reviewer: Are these deployment-level alerts? Seems like a kinda weird transition from one type to the other

Author: Tried reworking this section in my latest commit - realized that you don't really subsribe to specific alerts, only alert types via receivers. 

Do you think it's worth adding a `severity` column to these tables?

| `ContainerMemoryNearTheLimitInDeployment` | A container in your Airflow Deployment is near its memory quota; it's been using over 95% of its memory quota for over 60 minutes. | Either increase your Deployment's allocated resources in the Astronomer UI or update your DAGs to use less memory. If you have not already done so, upgrade to [Airflow 2.0](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/introducing-airflow-2-0) for improved resource management.                                                                                                                                                                                          |

For a list of all built-in Airflow and platform alerts, refer to [the full Prometheus configmap](https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer/blob/master/charts/prometheus/templates/prometheus-alerts-configmap.yaml).

## Create Custom Alerts

> In addition to subscribing to Astronomer's built-in alerts, you can also create custom alerts and push them to your Astronomer platform.

Reviewer: Can these custom alerts be platform and deployment-level ones, or just platform? Maybe clarify if poss?

Author: Hopefully this is clarified in my new `Anatomy of an Alert` section
